As we discussed in 7Chap. 2, the prevalence is the frequency of an event in a population; it is a useful starting point for estimating
probability. For example, if you wanted to estimate the probability of prostate cancer in a
50-year-old man, the prevalence of prostate
cancer in men of that age (5–14%) would be a
useful anchor point from which you could increase or decrease the probability depending
on your fndings. Estimates of disease prevalence in a defned population often are available in the medical literature.
Symptoms, such as diffculty with urination, or signs, such as a palpable prostate nodule, can be used to place patients into a clinical
subgroup in which the probability of disease is
known. For patients referred to a urologist for
evaluation of a prostate nodule, the prevalence of cancer is about 50%. This approach
may be limited by diffculty in placing a patient in the correct clinically defned subgroup,
especially if the criteria for classifying patients
are ill-defned. A trend has been to develop
guidelines, known as clinical prediction rules,
to help clinicians assign patients to well-defned subgroups in which the probability of
disease is known.
Clinical prediction rules are developed from
systematic study of patients who have a particular diagnostic problem; they defne how clinicians can use combinations of clinical fndings
to estimate probability. The symptoms or signs
that make an independent contribution to the
probability that a patient has a disease are identifed and assigned numerical weights based on
statistical analysis of the fnding’s contribution.
The result is a list of symptoms and signs for an
individual patient, each with a corresponding
numerical contribution to a total score. The total score places a patient in a subgroup with a
known probability of disease.
► Example 3.5
Ms. Troy, a 65-year-old woman who had a heart
attack 4 months ago, has abnormal heart rhythm
(arrhythmia), is in poor medical condition, and
is about to undergo elective surgery. ◄
What is the probability that Ms. Troy will
suffer a cardiac complication? Clinical prediction rules have been developed to help clinicians to assess this risk (Palda and Detsky
1997). .Table 3.1 lists clinical fndings and
their corresponding diagnostic weights. We
add the diagnostic weights for each of the
patient’s clinical fndings to obtain the total
score. The total score places the patient in a
group with a defned probability of cardiac
complications, as shown in .Table 3.2. Ms.
Troy receives a score of 20; thus, the clinician
can estimate that the patient has a 27%
chance of developing a severe cardiac complication.
Objective estimates of pretest probability
are subject to error because of bias in the
studies on which the estimates are based. For
..      Table 3.1 Diagnostic weights for assessing
risk of cardiac complications from noncardiac
surgery
Clinical fnding Diagnostic
weight
Age greater than 70 years 5
Recent documented heart
attack
>6 months previously 5
<6 months previously 10
Severe angina 20
Pulmonary edemaa
Within 1 week 10
Ever 5
Arrhythmia on most recent
ECG 5
>5 PVCs 5
Critical aortic stenosis 20
Poor medical condition 5
Emergency surgery 10
ECG electrocardiogram, PVCs premature ventricular contractions on preoperative electrocardiogram
aFluid in the lungs due to reduced heart function
Biomedical Decision Making: Probabilistic Clinical Reasoning
86
3
instance, published prevalence data may not
apply directly to a particular patient. A clinical illustration is that early studies indicated
that a patient found to have microscopic evidence of blood in the urine (microhematuria)
should undergo extensive tests because a signifcant proportion of the patients would be
found to have cancer or other serious diseases.
The tests involve some risk, discomfort, and
expense to the patient. Nonetheless, the approach of ordering tests for any patient with
microhematuria was widely practiced for
some years. A later study, however, suggested
that the probability of serious disease in asymptomatic patients with only microscopic
evidence of blood was only about 2%. In the
past, many patients may have undergone unnecessary tests, at considerable fnancial and
personal cost.
What explains the discrepancy in the estimates of disease prevalence? The initial studies
that showed a high prevalence of disease in patients with microhematuria were performed on
patients referred to urologists, who are specialists. The primary care clinician refers patients
whom he or she suspects have a disease in the
specialist’s sphere of expertise. Because of this
initial screening by primary care clinicians, the
specialists seldom see patients with clinical
fndings that imply a low probability of disease. Thus, the prevalence of disease in the patient population in a specialist’s practice often
is much higher than that in a primary care
practice; studies performed with the former patients therefore almost always overestimate disease probabilities. This example demonstrates
referral bias. Referral bias is common because
many published studies are performed on patients referred to specialists. Thus, one may
need to adjust published estimates before one
uses them to estimate pretest probability in
other clinical settings.
We now can use the techniques discussed in
this part of the chapter to illustrate how the clinician in 7Example 3.4 might estimate the pretest probability of heart disease in his or her
patient, Mr. Smith, who has pressure-like chest
pain. We begin by using the objective data that
are available. The prevalence of heart disease in
60-year-old men could be our starting point. In
this case, however, we can obtain a more refned estimate by placing the patient in a clinical subgroup in which the prevalence of disease
is known. The prevalence in a clinical subgroup, such as men with symptoms typical of
coronary heart disease, will predict the pretest
probability more accurately than would the
prevalence of heart disease in a group that is
heterogeneous with respect to symptoms, such
as the population at large. We assume that large
studies have shown the prevalence of coronary
heart disease in men with typical symptoms of
angina pectoris to be about 0.9; this prevalence
is useful as an initial estimate that can be adjusted based on information specifc to the patient. Although the prevalence of heart disease
in men with typical symptoms is high, 10% of
patients with this history do not have heart disease.
The clinician might use subjective methods to adjust his or her estimate further based
on other specifc information about the patient. For example, the clinician might adjust
his or her initial estimate of 0.9 upward to
0.95 or higher based on information about
family history of heart disease. The clinician
should be careful, however, to avoid the mistakes that can occur when one uses heuristics
to make subjective probability estimates. In
particular, he or she should be aware of the
tendency to stay too close to the initial estimate when adjusting for additional information. By combining subjective and objective
methods for assessing pretest probability, the
clinician can arrive at a reasonable estimate of
the pretest probability of heart disease.
..      Table 3.2 Clinical prediction rule for
diagnostic weights in .Table 3.1
Total score Prevalence (%) of cardiac
complicationsa
0–15 5
20–30 27
>30 60
aCardiac complications defned as death, heart
attack, or congestive heart failure
D. K. Owens et al.
87 3
In this section, we summarized subjective
and objective methods to determine the pretest probability, and we learned how to adjust
the pretest probability after assessing the specifc subpopulation of which the patient is
representative. The next step in the diagnostic
process is to gather further information, usually in the form of formal diagnostic tests
(laboratory tests, X-ray studies, etc.). To help
you to understand this step more clearly, we
discuss in the next two sections how to measure the accuracy of tests and how to use
probability to interpret the results of the tests.
3.3 Measurement of the Operating
Characteristics of Diagnostic
Tests
The frst challenge in assessing any test is to
determine criteria for deciding whether a result is normal or abnormal. In this section, we
present the issues that you need to consider
when making such a determination.
3.3.1 Classifcation of Test Results
as Abnormal
Most biological measurements in a population of healthy people are continuous variables that assume different values for different
individuals. The distribution of values often is
approximated by the normal (gaussian, or
bell-shaped) distribution curve (. Fig. 3.2).
Thus, 95% of the population will fall within
two standard deviations of the mean. About
2.5% of the population will be more than two
standard deviations from the mean at each
end of the distribution. The distribution of
values for ill individuals may be normally distributed as well. The two distributions usually
overlap (see .Fig. 3.2).
How is a test result classifed as abnormal?
Most clinical laboratories report an “upper
limit of normal,” which usually is defned as
two standard deviations above the mean.
Thus, a test result greater than two standard
deviations above the mean is reported as abnormal (or positive); a test result below that
cutoff is reported as normal (or negative). As
an example, if the mean cholesterol concentration in the blood is 180 mg/dl, a clinical
laboratory might choose as the upper limit of
normal 220 mg/dl because it is two standard
deviations above the mean. Note that a cutoff
that is based on an arbitrary statistical criterion may not have biological signifcance.
An ideal test would have no values at
which the distribution of diseased and nondiseased people overlap. That is, if the cutoff
value were set appropriately, the test would be
normal in all healthy individuals and abnormal in all individuals with disease. Few tests
meet this standard. If a test result is defned as
False positives
False negatives
Abnormal
Diseased
population
Cuto
value
Test result
Healthy
population
Normal
Number of
individuals
..      Fig. 3.2 Distribution of test results in healthy and
diseased individuals. Varying the cutoff between “normal” and “abnormal” across the continuous range of
possible values changes the relative proportions of false
positives (FPs) and false negatives (FNs) for the two
populations
Biomedical Decision Making: Probabilistic Clinical Reasoning
88
3
abnormal by the statistical criterion, 2.5% of
healthy individuals will have an abnormal
test. If there is an overlap in the distribution
of test results in healthy and diseased individuals, some diseased patients will have a normal test (see . Fig. 3.2). You should be
familiar with the terms used to denote these
groups:
5 A true positive (TP) is a positive test result
obtained for a patient in whom the disease
is present (the test result correctly classifes
the patient as having the disease).
5 A true negative (TN) is a negative test result obtained for a patient in whom the
disease is absent (the test result correctly
classifes the patient as not having the disease).
5 A false positive (FP) is a positive test result
obtained for a patient in whom the disease
is absent (the test result incorrectly classifes the patient as having the disease).
5 A false negative (FN) is a negative test result obtained for a patient in whom the
disease is present (the test result incorrectly classifes the patient as not having the
disease).
.Figure 3.2 shows that varying the cutoff
point (moving the vertical line in the fgure)
for an abnormal test will change the relative
proportions of these groups. As the cutoff is
moved further up from the mean of the normal values, the number of FNs increases and
the number of FPs decreases. Once we have
chosen a cutoff point, we can conveniently
summarize test performance—the ability to
discriminate disease from nondisease—in a 2
× 2 contingency table, as shown in .Table
3.3. The table summarizes the number of patients in each group: TP, FP, TN, and FN.
Note that the sum of the frst column is the
total number of diseased patients, TP + FN.
The sum of the second column is the total
number of nondiseased patients, FP + TN.
The sum of the frst row, TP + FP, is the total
number of patients with a positive test result.
Likewise, FN + TN gives the total number of
patients with a negative test result.
A perfect test would have no FN or FP results. Erroneous test results do occur, however, and you can use a 2 × 2 contingency table
to defne the measures of test performance
that refect these errors.
3.3.2 Measures of Test Performance
Measures of test performance are of two
types: measures of agreement between tests or
measures of concordance, and measures of
disagreement or measures of discordance.
Two types of concordant test results occur in
the 2 × 2 table in .Table 3.3: TPs and TNs.
The relative frequencies of these results form
the basis of the measures of concordance.
These measures correspond to the ideas of the
sensitivity and specifcity of a test, which we
introduced in 7Chap. 2. We defne each measure in terms of the 2 × 2 table and in terms of
conditional probabilities.
The true-positive rate (TPR), or sensitivity, is the likelihood that a diseased patient has
a positive test. In conditional-probability notation, sensitivity is expressed as the probability of a positive test given that disease is
present:
p[ ] positive test|disease .
Another way to think of the TPR is as a ratio.
The likelihood that a diseased patient has a
positive test is given by the ratio of diseased
..      Table 3.3 A 2 × 2 contingency table for test
results
Results of
test
Disease
present
Disease
absent
Total
Positive
result
TP FP TP + FP
Negative
result
FN TN FN + TN
TP + FN FP + TN
TP true positive, TN true negative, FP false positive, FN false negative
D. K. Owens et al.
89 3
patients with a positive test to all diseased patients:
TPR
number of diseased patients
with positive test
total number of d = iseased patients
æ
è
ç
ç
ç
ç
ö
ø
÷
÷
÷
÷
.
We can determine these numbers for our example from the 2 × 2 table (see .Table 3.3).
The number of diseased patients with a positive test is TP. The total number of diseased
patients is the sum of the frst column, TP +
FN. So,
TPR TP
TP FN = + .
The true-negative rate (TNR), or specifcity, is
the likelihood that a nondiseased patient has a
negative test result. In terms of conditional
probability, specifcity is the probability of a
negative test given that disease is absent:
p[ ] negative test|no disease .
Viewed as a ratio, the TNR is the number of
nondiseased patients with a negative test divided by the total number of nondiseased patients:
TNR
Number of nondiseased patients
with negative test
Total number = of nondiseased
patients
æ
è
ç
ç
ç
ç
ö
ø
÷
÷
÷
÷
From the 2 × 2 table (see .Table 3.3),
TNR TN
TN FP = +
The measures of discordance—the falsepositive rate (FPR) and the false-negative rate
(FNR)—are defned similarly. The FNR is the
likelihood that a diseased patient has a negative test result. As a ratio,
FNR
Number of diseased patients
with negative test
Total number of d = iseased patients
FN
FN TP
æ
è
ç
ç
ç
ç
ö
ø
÷
÷
÷
÷
= + .
..      Table 3.4 A 2 × 2 contingency table for HIV
antibody EIA
EIA test result Antibody
present
Antibody
absent
Total
Positive EIA 98 3 101
Negative EIA 2 297 299
100 300
EIA enzyme-linked immunoassay
5 This example assumes that we have a perfect method
(different from EIA) for determining the presence or
absence of antibody. We discuss the idea of goldstandard tests in 7 Sect. 3.3.4. We have chosen the
numbers in the example to simplify the calculations.
In practice, the sensitivity and specifcity of the HIV
EIAs are greater than 99%.
The FPR is the likelihood that a nondiseased
patient has a positive test result:
FPR
Number of nondiseased patients
with positive test
Total number = of nondiseased patients
FP
FP TN
æ
è
ç
ç
ç
ç
ö
ø
÷
÷
÷
÷
= +
► Example 3.6
Consider again the problem of screening blood
donors for HIV. One test used to screen blood
donors for HIV antibody is an enzyme-linked
immunoassay (EIA). So that the performance
of the EIA can be measured, the test is performed on 400 patients; the hypothetical results
are shown in the 2 × 2 table in .Table 3.4.
5 ◄
To determine test performance, we calculate
the TPR (sensitivity) and TNR (specifcity) of
the EIA antibody test. The TPR, as defned
previously, is:
TP
TP + FN = + = 98
98 2
0 9. 8
Thus, the likelihood that a patient with the
HIV antibody will have a positive EIA test is
Biomedical Decision Making: Probabilistic Clinical Reasoning
90
3
0.98. If the test were performed on 100 patients who truly had the antibody, we would
expect the test to be positive in 98 of the patients. Conversely, we would expect two of the
patients to receive incorrect, negative results,
for an FNR of 2%. (You should convince
yourself that the sum of TPR and FNR by
defnition must be 1: TPR + FNR = 1).
And the TNR is:
TN
TN + FP = + = 297
297 3
0 9. 9
The likelihood that a patient who has no HIV
antibody will have a negative test is 0.99.
Therefore, if the EIA test were performed on
100 individuals who had not been infected
with HIV, it would be negative in 99 and incorrectly positive in 1. (Convince yourself that
the sum of TNR and FPR also must be 1:
TNR + FPR = 1).
3.3.3 Implications of Sensitivity
and Specifcity: How to
Choose Among Tests
It may be clear to you already that the calculated values of sensitivity and specifcity for a
continuous-valued test depend on the particular cutoff value chosen to distinguish normal
and abnormal results. In .Fig. 3.2, note that
increasing the cutoff level (moving it to the
right) would decrease signifcantly the number
of FP tests but also would increase the number of FN tests. Thus, the test would have become more specifc but less sensitive. Similarly,
a lower cutoff value would increase the FPs
and decrease the FNs, thereby increasing sensitivity while decreasing specifcity. Whenever
a decision is made about what cutoff to use in
calling a test abnormal, an inherent philosophic decision is being made about whether
it is better to tolerate FNs (missed cases) or
FPs (nondiseased people inappropriately classifed as diseased). The choice of cutoff depends on the disease in question and on the
purpose of testing. If the disease is serious
and if lifesaving therapy is available, we should
try to minimize the number of FN results. On
the other hand, if the disease in not serious
and the therapy is dangerous, we should set
the cutoff value to minimize FP results.
We stress the point that sensitivity and specifcity are characteristics not of a test per se but
rather of the test and a criterion for when to
call that test abnormal. Varying the cutoff in .
Fig. 3.2 has no effect on the test itself (the way
it is performed, or the specifc values for any
particular patient); instead, it trades off specifcity for sensitivity. Thus, the best way to characterize a test is by the range of values of
sensitivity and specifcity that it can take on
over a range of possible cutoffs. The typical
way to show this relationship is to plot the test’s
sensitivity against 1 minus specifcity (i.e., the
TPR against the FPR), as the cutoff is varied
and the two test characteristics are traded off
against each other (.Fig. 3.3). The resulting
curve, known as a receiver-operating characteristic (ROC) curve, was originally described by
researchers investigating methods of electromagnetic-signal detection and was later applied to the feld of psychology (Peterson and
Birdsall 1953; Swets 1973). Any given point
along a ROC curve for a test corresponds to
the test sensitivity and specifcity for a given
threshold of “abnormality.” Similar curves can
be drawn for any test used to associate ob0
0
0.5
Test A
Test B
True-positive rate (sensitivity)
1.0
0.5
False-positive rate (1- specicity)
1.0
..      Fig. 3.3 Receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
curves for two hypothetical tests. Test B is more discriminative than test A because its curve is higher (e.g., the
false-positive rate (FPR) for test B is lower than the
FPR for test A at any value of true-positive rate (TPR)).
However, the more discriminative test may not always be
preferred in clinical practice (see text)
D. K. Owens et al.
91 3
served clinical data with specifc diseases or disease categories.
Suppose a new test were introduced that
competed with the current way of screening
for the presence of a disease. For example,
suppose a new radiologic procedure for assessing the presence or absence of pneumonia
became available. This new test could be assessed for trade-offs in sensitivity and specifcity, and an ROC curve could be drawn. As
shown in .Fig. 3.3, a test has better discriminating power than a competing test if its ROC
curve lies above that of the other test. In other
words, test B is more discriminating than test
A when its specifcity is greater than test A’s
specifcity for any level of sensitivity (and
when its sensitivity is greater than test A’s sensitivity for any level of specifcity).
Understanding ROC curves is important
in understanding test selection and data interpretation. Clinicians should not necessarily,
however, always choose the test with the most
discriminating ROC curve. Matters of cost,
risk, discomfort, and delay also are important
in the choice about what data to collect and
what tests to perform. When you must choose
among several available tests, you should select the test that has the highest sensitivity and
specifcity, provided that other factors, such as
cost and risk to the patient, are equal. The
higher the sensitivity and specifcity of a test,
the more the results of that test will reduce
uncertainty about probability of disease.
3.3.4 Design of Studies of Test
Performance
In 7Sect. 3.3.2, we discussed measures of test
performance: a test’s ability to discriminate disease from no disease. When we classify a test
result as TP, TN, FP, or FN, we assume that we
know with certainty whether a patient is diseased or healthy. Thus, the validity of any test’s
results must be measured against a gold standard: a test that reveals the patient’s true disease
state, such as a biopsy of diseased tissue or a
surgical operation. A gold-standard test is a procedure that is used to defne unequivocally the
presence or absence of disease. The test whose
discrimination is being measured is called the
index test. The gold-standard test usually is
more expensive, riskier, or more diffcult to perform than is the index test (otherwise, the less
precise test would not be used at all).
The performance of the index test is measured in a small, select group of patients enrolled
in a study. We are interested, however, in how the
test performs in the broader group of patients in
which it will be used in practice. The test may
perform differently in the two groups, so we
make the following distinction: the study population comprises those patients (usually a subset
of the clinically relevant population) in whom
test discrimination is measured and reported;
the clinically relevant population comprises those
patients in whom a test typically is used.
3.3.5 Bias in the Measurement of
Test Characteristics
We mentioned earlier the problem of referral
bias. Published estimates of disease prevalence
(derived from a study population) may differ
from the prevalence in the clinically relevant
population because diseased patients are more
likely to be included in studies than are nondiseased patients. Similarly, published values of
sensitivity and specifcity are derived from
study populations that may differ from the clinically relevant populations in terms of average
level of health and disease prevalence. These
differences may affect test performance, so the
reported values may not apply to many patients in whom a test is used in clinical practice.
► Example 3.7
In the early 1970s, a blood test called the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was touted as
a screening test for colon cancer. Reports of
early investigations, performed in selected patients, indicated that the test had high sensitivity and specifcity. Subsequent work, however,
proved the CEA to be completely valueless as a
screening blood test for colon cancer. Screening
tests are used in unselected populations, and
the differences between the study and clinically
relevant populations were partly responsible for
the original miscalculations of the CEA’s TPR
and TNR (Ransohoff and Feinstein 1978). ◄
Biomedical Decision Making: Probabilistic Clinical Reasoning
92
3
The experience with CEA has been repeated
with numerous tests. Early measures of test
discrimination are overly optimistic, and subsequent test performance is disappointing.
Problems arise when the TPR and TNR, as
measured in the study population, do not apply to the clinically relevant population. These
problems usually are the result of bias in the design of the initial studies—notably spectrum
bias, test referral bias, or test interpretation bias.
Spectrum bias occurs when the study population includes only individuals who have advanced disease (“sickest of the sick”) and
healthy volunteers, as is often the case when a
test is frst being developed. Advanced disease
may be easier to detect than early disease. For
example, cancer is easier to detect when it has
spread throughout the body (metastasized)
than when it is localized to, say, a small portion
of the colon. In contrast to the study population, the clinically relevant population will contain more cases of early disease that are more
likely to be missed by the index test (FNs).
Thus, the study population will have an artifactually low FNR, which produces an artifactually high TPR (TPR = 1 − FNR). In addition,
healthy volunteers are less likely than are patients in the clinically relevant population to
have other diseases that may cause FP results6;
the study population will have an artifcially
low FPR, and therefore the specifcity will be
overestimated (TNR = 1 − FPR). Inaccuracies
in early estimates of the TPR and TNR of the
CEA were partly due to spectrum bias.
Test-referral bias (sometimes referred to as
referral bias) occurs when a positive index test
is a criterion for ordering the gold standard
test. In clinical practice, patients with negative
index tests are less likely to undergo the gold
standard test than are patients with positive
tests. In other words, the study population,
comprising individuals with positive index–test
results, has a higher percentage of patients with
disease than does the clinically relevant population. Therefore, both TN and FN tests will be
underrepresented in the study population. The
result is overestimation of the TPR and underestimation of the TNR in the study population.
Test-interpretation bias develops when the
interpretation of the index test affects that of the
gold standard test or vice versa. This bias causes
an artifcial concordance between the tests (the
results are more likely to be the same) and spuriously increases measures of concordance—the
sensitivity and specifcity—in the study population. (Remember, the relative frequencies of TPs
and TNs are the basis for measures of concordance). To avoid these problems, the person interpreting the index test should be unaware of
the results of the gold standard test.
To counter these three biases, you may
need to adjust the TPR and TNR when they
are applied to a new population. All the biases
result in a TPR that is higher in the study population than it is in the clinically relevant population. Thus, if you suspect bias, you should
adjust the TPR (sensitivity) downward when
you apply it to a new population.
Adjustment of the TNR (specifcity) depends on which type of bias is present.
Spectrum bias and test interpretation bias result in a TNR that is higher in the study population than it will be in the clinically relevant
population. Thus, if these biases are present,
you should adjust the specifcity downward
when you apply it to a new population. Testreferral bias, on the other hand, produces a
measured specifcity in the study population
that is lower than it will be in the clinically relevant population. If you suspect test referral
bias, you should adjust the specifcity upward
when you apply it to a new population.
3.3.6 Meta-Analysis of Diagnostic
Tests
Often, there are many studies that evaluate the
sensitivity and specifcity of the same diagnostic
test. If the studies come to similar conclusions
6 Volunteers are often healthy, whereas patients in the
clinically relevant population often have several diseases in addition to the disease for which a test is
designed. These other diseases may cause FP test
results. For example, patients with benign (rather
than malignant) enlargement of their prostate
glands are more likely than are healthy volunteers to
have FP elevations of prostate-specifc antigen
(Meigs et al. 1996), a substance in the blood that is
elevated in men who have prostate cancer. Measurement of prostate-specifc antigen is often used to
detect prostate cancer.
D. K. Owens et al.
93 3
about the sensitivity and specifcity of the test,
you can have increased confdence in the results
of the studies. But what if the studies disagree?
For example, by 1995, over 100 studies had assessed the sensitivity and specifcity of the PCR
for diagnosis of HIV (Owens et al. 1996a, b);
these studies estimated the sensitivity of PCR to
be as low as 10% and to be as high as 100%, and
they assessed the specifcity of PCR to be between 40 and 100%. Which results should you
believe? One approach that you can use is to assess the quality of the studies and to use the estimates from the highest-quality studies.
For evaluation of PCR, however, even the
high-quality studies did not agree. Another approach is to perform a meta-analysis: a study
that combines quantitatively the estimates
from individual studies to develop a summary
ROC curve (Moses et al. 1993; Owens et al.
1996a, b; Hellmich et al. 1999; Leefang et al.
2008; Leefang 2014). Investigators develop a
summary ROC curve by using estimates from
many studies, in contrast to the type of ROC
curve discussed in 7Sect. 3.3.3, which is developed from the data in a single study. Summary
ROC curves provide the best available approach to synthesizing data from many studies.
7Section 3.3 has dealt with the second
step in the diagnostic process: acquisition of
further information with diagnostic tests. We
have learned how to characterize the performance of a test with sensitivity (TPR) and specifcity (TNR). These measures reveal the
probability of a test result given the true state of
the patient. They do not, however, answer the
clinically relevant question posed in the opening
example: Given a positive test result, what is the
probability that this patient has the disease? To
answer this question, we must learn methods to
calculate the post-test probability of disease.
3.4 Post-test Probability: Bayes’
Theorem and Predictive Value
The third stage of the diagnostic process (see
.Fig. 3.1a) is to adjust our probability estimate to take into account the new information gained from diagnostic tests by calculating
the post-test probability.
3.4.1 Bayes’ Theorem
As we noted earlier in this chapter, a clinician can
use the disease prevalence in the patient population as an initial estimate of the pretest risk of
disease. Once clinicians begin to accumulate information about a patient, however, they revise
their estimate of the probability of disease. The
revised estimate (rather than the disease prevalence in the general population) becomes the pretest probability for the test that they perform.
After they have gathered more information with
a diagnostic test, they can calculate the post-test
probability of disease with Bayes’ theorem.
Bayes’ theorem is a quantitative method
for calculating post-test probability using the
pretest probability and the sensitivity and
specifcity of the test. The theorem is derived
from the defnition of conditional probability
and from the properties of probability (see the
Appendix to this chapter for the derivation).
Recall that a conditional probability is the
probability that event A will occur given that
event B is known to occur (see 7Sect. 3.2). In
general, we want to know the probability that
disease is present (event A), given that the test is
known to be positive (event B). We denote the
presence of disease as D, its absence as − D, a
test result as R, and the pretest probability of
disease as p[D]. The probability of disease, given
a test result, is written p[D|R]. Bayes’ theorem is:
p D|R p D p R|D
p D R|D p D p R| D [ ] = [ ]´ [ ]
[ ]´ p[ ] + -[ ]´ - [ ]
We can reformulate this general equation in
terms of a positive test, (+), by substituting
p[D|+] for p[D|R], p[+|D] for p[R|D], p[+| −
D] for p[R| − D], and 1 − p[D] for p[− D].
From 7Sect. 3.3, recall that p[+|D] = TPR
and p[+| − D] = FPR. Substitution provides
Bayes’ theorem for a positive test:
p D| p D TPR
p D TPR p D FPR [ ] + = [ ]´
[ ]´ + ( ) 1- [ ] ´
We can use a similar derivation to develop
Bayes’ theorem for a negative test:
p D| p D FNR
p D FNR p D TNR [ ] - = [ ]´
[ ]´ + ( ) 1- [ ] ´
Biomedical Decision Making: Probabilistic Clinical Reasoning
94
3
► Example 3.8
We are now able to calculate the clinically important probability in 7Example 3.4: the posttest probability of heart disease after a positive
exercise test. At the end of 7Sect. 3.2.2, we estimated the pretest probability of heart disease as
0.95, based on the prevalence of heart disease in
men who have typical symptoms of heart disease
and on the prevalence in people with a family
history of heart disease. Assume that the TPR
and FPR of the exercise stress test are 0.65 and
0.20, respectively. Substituting in Bayes’ formula
for a positive test, we obtain the probability of
heart disease given a positive test result:
p[ ] D| + = ´
´ + ´ = 0 95 0 65
0 95 0 65 0 05 0 20
0 98 . .
. . . . . ◄
Thus, the positive test raised the post-test probability to 0.98 from the pretest probability of
0.95. The change in probability is modest because the pretest probability was high (0.95) and
because the FPR also is high (0.20). If we repeat
the calculation with a pretest probability of 0.75,
the post-test probability is 0.91. If we assume
the FPR of the test to be 0.05 instead of 0.20, a
pretest probability of 0.95 changes to 0.996.
3.4.2 The Odds-Ratio Form of Bayes’
Theorem and Likelihood
Ratios
Although the formula for Bayes’ theorem is
straightforward, it is awkward for mental calculations. We can develop a more convenient
form of Bayes’ theorem by expressing probability as odds and by using a different measure
of test discrimination. Probability and odds
are related as follows:
odds p
p
p
odds
odds
= -
= +
1
1
,
.
Thus, if the probability of rain today is 0.75,
the odds are 3:1. Thus, on similar days, we
should expect rain to occur three times for
each time it does not occur.
A simple relationship exists between
pre-test odds and post-test odds:
7 Some authors refer to this expression as the oddslikelihood form of Bayes’ theorem.
post-test odds = ´ pretest odds likelihood ratio
or
p
p
p
p
p
p
D|R
D|R
D
D
R|D
R| D
[ ]
[ ] - = [ ]
[ ] - ´ [ ]
[ ] - .
This equation is the odds-ratio form of Bayes’
theorem.7 It can be derived in a straightforward fashion from the defnitions of Bayes’
theorem and of conditional probability that
we provided earlier. Thus, to obtain the posttest odds, we simply multiply the pre-test odds
by the likelihood ratio (LR) for the test in
question.
The LR of a test combines the measures
of test discrimination discussed earlier to give
one number that characterizes the discriminatory power of a test, defned as:
LR R|D
R| D = [ ]
[ ] -
p
p
or
LR
probability of result
in diseased people
probability of result
i
=
n nondiseased people
The LR indicates the amount that the odds of
disease change based on the test result. We
can use the LR to characterize clinical fndings (such as a swollen leg) or a test result. We
describe the performance of a test that has
only two possible outcomes (e.g., positive or
negative) by two LRs: one corresponding to a
positive test result and the other corresponding to a negative test. These ratios are abbreviated LR+and LR−, respectively.
LR
probability that test
is positive in
diseased people
probabil
+ =
ity that test
is positive in
nondiseased people
æ
è
ç
ç
ç
ç
ç
ç
ç
ö
ø
÷
÷
÷
÷
÷
÷
÷
= TPR
FPR
D. K. Owens et al.
95 3
In a test that discriminates well between disease and nondisease, the TPR will be high, the
FPR will be low, and thus LR+will be much
greater than 1. A LR of 1 means that the
probability of a test result is the same in diseased and nondiseased individuals; the test
has no value. Similarly,
LR
probability that test
is negative in
diseased people
probabil - = ity that test
is negative in
nondiseased people
æ
è
ç
ç
ç
ç
ç
ç
ç
ö
ø
÷
÷
÷
÷
÷
÷
÷
= FNR
TNR
A desirable test will have a low FNR and a
high TNR; therefore, the LR−will be much
less than 1.
► Example 3.9
We can calculate the post-test probability for
a positive exercise stress test in a 70 year-old
woman whose pretest probability is 0.75. The
pretest odds are:
odds = or - = - = = p
1 p
0 75
1 0 75
0 75
0 25
3 3 1 .
.
.
. , :
The LR for the stress test is:
LR TPR
FPR
+ = = = 0 65
0 20
3 25 .
. .
We can calculate the post-test odds of a positive test result using the odds-ratio form of
Bayes’ theorem:
post-test odds = = 3 3 ´ . . 25 9 75 1:
We can then convert the odds to a probability:
p
odds
odds = + = + = 1
9 75
1 9 75
0 91 .
. . ◄
As expected, this result agrees with our earlier
answer (see the discussion of 7Example 3.8).
The odds-ratio form of Bayes’ theorem
allows rapid calculation. The LR is a powerful method for characterizing the operating
characteristics of a test: if you know the
pretest odds, you can calculate the post-test
odds in one step. The LR demonstrates that
a useful test is one that changes the odds of
disease.
3.4.3 Predictive Value of a Test
An alternative approach for estimation of the
probability of disease in a person who has a
positive or negative test is to calculate the predictive value of the test. The positive predictive value (PV+) of a test is the likelihood that
a patient who has a positive test result also has
disease. Thus, PV+can be calculated directly
from a 2 × 2 contingency table:
PV
number of diseased patients
with positive test
total number of p
+ =
atients
with a positive test
From the 2 × 2 contingency table in .Table
3.3,
PV TP
TP FP
+ =
+
The negative predictive value (PV−) is the likelihood that a patient with a negative test does
not have disease:
PV
number of nondiseased patients
with negative test
Total number - = of patients
with a negative test
From the 2 × 2 contingency table in .Table 3.3,
PV TN
TN FN